<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>
			<p>That was a thought almost continuously in his mind, even when he was hardest at work; and, as the days went on and he could not free himself, he became querulous about it. ‚ÄúI guess I‚Äôm the biggest dang fool alive,‚Äù he told his wife as they sat together one evening. ‚ÄúI got plenty else to bother me, without worrying my head off about what <em>he</em> thinks. I can‚Äôt help what he thinks; it‚Äôs too late for that. So why should I keep pestering myself about it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôll wear off, Virgil,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAdams said, reassuringly. She was gentle and sympathetic with him, and for the first time in many years he would come to sit with her and talk, when he had finished his day‚Äôs work. He had told her, evading her eye, ‚ÄúOh, I don‚Äôt blame you. You didn‚Äôt get after me to do this on your own account; you couldn‚Äôt help it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes; but it don‚Äôt wear off,‚Äù he complained. ‚ÄúThis afternoon I was showing the men how I wanted my vats to go, and I caught my fool self standing there saying to my fool self, ‚ÄòIt‚Äôs funny I don‚Äôt hear how he feels about it from <em>some</em>body.‚Äô I was saying it aloud, almost‚ÅÝ‚Äîand it <em>is</em> funny I don‚Äôt hear anything!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, you see what it means, don‚Äôt you, Virgil? It only means he hasn‚Äôt said anything to anybody about it. Don‚Äôt you think you‚Äôre getting kind of morbid over it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMaybe, maybe,‚Äù he muttered.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy, yes,‚Äù she said, briskly. ‚ÄúYou don‚Äôt realize what a little bit of a thing all this is to him. It‚Äôs been a long, long while since the last time you even mentioned glue to him, and he‚Äôs probably forgotten everything about it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôre off your base; it isn‚Äôt like him to forget things,‚Äù Adams returned, peevishly. ‚ÄúHe may seem to forget ‚Äôem, but he don‚Äôt.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut he‚Äôs not thinking about this, or you‚Äôd have heard from him before now.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Her husband shook his head. ‚ÄúAh, that‚Äôs just it!‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúWhy <em>haven‚Äôt</em> I heard from him?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs all your morbidness, Virgil. Look at Walter: if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLamb held this up against you, would he still let Walter stay there? Wouldn‚Äôt he have discharged Walter if he felt angry with you?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat dang boy!‚Äù Adams said. ‚ÄúIf he <em>wanted</em> to come with me now, I wouldn‚Äôt hardly let him, What do you suppose makes him so bullheaded?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut hasn‚Äôt he a right to choose for himself?‚Äù she asked. ‚ÄúI suppose he feels he ought to stick to what he thinks is sure pay. As soon as he sees that you‚Äôre going to succeed with the glue-works he‚Äôll want to be with you quick enough.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, he better get a little sense in his head,‚Äù Adams returned, crossly. ‚ÄúHe wanted me to pay him a three-hundred-dollar bonus in advance, when anybody with a grain of common sense knows I need every penny I can lay my hands on!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNever mind,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúHe‚Äôll come around later and be glad of the chance.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHe‚Äôll have to beg for it then! <em>I</em> won‚Äôt ask him again.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, Walter will come out all right; you needn‚Äôt worry. And don‚Äôt you see that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLamb‚Äôs not discharging him means there‚Äôs no hard feeling against you, Virgil?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI can‚Äôt make it out at all,‚Äù he said, frowning. ‚ÄúThe only thing I can <em>think</em> it means is that <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> Lamb is so fair-minded‚ÅÝ‚Äîand of course he <em>is</em> one of the fair-mindedest men alive‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI suppose that‚Äôs the reason he hasn‚Äôt fired Walter. He may know,‚Äù Adams concluded, morosely‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúhe may know that‚Äôs just another thing to make me feel all the meaner: keeping my boy there on a salary after I‚Äôve done him an injury.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow, now!‚Äù she said, trying to comfort him. ‚ÄúYou couldn‚Äôt do anybody an injury to save your life, and everybody knows it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, anybody ought to know I wouldn‚Äôt <em>want</em> to do an injury, but this world isn‚Äôt built so‚Äôt we can do just what we want.‚Äù He paused, reflecting. ‚ÄúOf course there may be one explanation of why Walter‚Äôs still there: <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> maybe hasn‚Äôt noticed that he <em>is</em> there. There‚Äôs so many I expect he hardly knows him by sight.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, just do quit thinking about it,‚Äù she urged him. ‚ÄúIt only bothers you without doing any good. Don‚Äôt you know that?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt I, though!‚Äù he laughed, feebly. ‚ÄúI know it better‚Äôn anybody! How funny that is: when you know thinking about a thing only pesters you without helping anything at all, and yet you keep right on pestering yourself with it!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut <em>why</em>?‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs the use when you know you haven‚Äôt done anything wrong, Virgil? You said yourself you were going to improve the process so much it would be different from the old one, and you‚Äôd <em>really</em> have a right to it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Adams had persuaded himself of this when he yielded; he had found it necessary to persuade himself of it‚ÅÝ‚Äîthough there was a part of him, of course, that remained unpersuaded; and this discomfiting part of him was what made his present trouble. ‚ÄúYes, I know,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúThat‚Äôs true, but I can‚Äôt quite seem to get away from the fact that the principle of the process is a good deal the same‚ÅÝ‚Äîwell, it‚Äôs more‚Äôn that; it‚Äôs just about the same as the one he hired Campbell and me to work out for him. Truth is, nobody could tell the difference, and I don‚Äôt know as there <em>is</em> any difference except in these improvements I‚Äôm making. Of course, the improvements do give me pretty near a perfect right to it, as a person might say; and that‚Äôs one of the things I thought of putting in my letter to him; but I was afraid he‚Äôd just think I was trying to make up excuses, so I left it out. I kind of worried all the time I was writing that letter, because if he thought I <em>was</em> just making up excuses, why, it might set him just so much more against me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Ever since <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAdams had found that she was to have her way, the depths of her eyes had been troubled by a continuous uneasiness; and, although she knew it was there, and sometimes veiled it by keeping the revealing eyes averted from her husband and children, she could not always cover it under that assumption of absentmindedness. The uneasy look became vivid, and her voice was slightly tremulous now, as she said, ‚ÄúBut what if he <em>should</em> be against you‚ÅÝ‚Äîalthough I don‚Äôt believe he is, of course‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou told me he couldn‚Äôt <em>do</em> anything to you, Virgil.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo,‚Äù he said, slowly. ‚ÄúI can‚Äôt see how he could do anything. It was just a secret, not a patent; the thing ain‚Äôt patentable. I‚Äôve tried to think what he could do‚ÅÝ‚Äîsupposing he was to want to‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut I can‚Äôt figure out anything at all that would be any harm to me. There isn‚Äôt any way in the world it could be made a question of law. Only thing he could do‚Äôd be to <em>tell</em> people his side of it, and set ‚Äôem against me. I been kind of waiting for that to happen, all along.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She looked somewhat relieved. ‚ÄúSo did I expect it,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúI was dreading it most on Alice‚Äôs account: it might have‚ÅÝ‚Äîwell, young men are so easily influenced and all. But so far as the business is concerned, what if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝLamb did talk? That wouldn‚Äôt amount to much. It wouldn‚Äôt affect the business; not to hurt. And, besides, he isn‚Äôt even doing that.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo; anyhow not yet, it seems.‚Äù And Adams sighed again, wistfully. ‚ÄúBut I <em>would</em> give a good deal to know what he thinks!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Before his surrender he had always supposed that if he did such an unthinkable thing as to seize upon the glue process for himself, what he would feel must be an overpowering shame. But shame is the rarest thing in the world: what he felt was this unremittent curiosity about his old employer‚Äôs thoughts. It was an obsession, yet he did not want to hear what Lamb ‚Äúthought‚Äù from Lamb himself, for Adams had a second obsession, and this was his dread of meeting the old man face to face. Such an encounter could happen only by chance and unexpectedly; since Adams would have avoided any deliberate meeting, so long as his legs had strength to carry him, even if Lamb came to the house to see him.</p>
			<p>But people do meet unexpectedly; and when Adams had to be downtown he kept away from the ‚Äúwholesale district.‚Äù One day he did see Lamb, as the latter went by in his car, impassive, going home to lunch; and Adams, in the crowd at a corner, knew that the old man had not seen him. Nevertheless, in a street car, on the way back to his sheds, an hour later, he was still subject to little shivering seizures of horror.</p>
			<p>He worked unceasingly, seeming to keep at it even in his sleep, for he always woke in the midst of a planning and estimating that must have been going on in his mind before consciousness of himself returned. Moreover, the work, thus urged, went rapidly, in spite of the high wages he had to pay his labourers for their short hours. ‚ÄúIt eats money,‚Äù he complained, and, in fact, by the time his vats and boilers were in place it had eaten almost all he could supply; but in addition to his equipment he now owned a stock of ‚Äúraw material,‚Äù raw indeed; and when operations should be a little further along he was confident his banker would be willing to ‚Äúcarry‚Äù him.</p>
			<p>Six weeks from the day he had obtained his lease he began his glue-making. The terrible smells came out of the sheds and went writhing like snakes all through that quarter of the town. A smiling man, strolling and breathing the air with satisfaction, would turn a corner and smile no more, but hurry. However, coloured people had almost all the dwellings of this old section to themselves; and although even they were troubled, there was recompense for them. Being philosophic about what appeared to them as in the order of nature, they sought neither escape nor redress, and soon learned to bear what the wind brought them. They even made use of it to enrich those figures of speech with which the native impulses of coloured people decorate their communications: they flavoured metaphor, simile, and invective with it; and thus may be said to have enjoyed it. But the man who produced it took a hot bath as soon as he reached his home the evening of that first day when his manufacturing began. Then he put on fresh clothes; but after dinner he seemed to be haunted, and asked his wife if she ‚Äúnoticed anything.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She laughed and inquired what he meant.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSeems to me as if that glue-works smell hadn‚Äôt quit hanging to me,‚Äù he explained. ‚ÄúDon‚Äôt you notice it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNo! What an idea!‚Äù</p>
			<p>He laughed, too, but uneasily; and told her he was sure ‚Äúthe dang glue smell‚Äù was somehow sticking to him. Later, he went outdoors and walked up and down the small yard in the dusk; but now and then he stood still, with his head lifted, and sniffed the air suspiciously. ‚ÄúCan <em>you</em> smell it?‚Äù he called to Alice, who sat upon the veranda, prettily dressed and waiting in a reverie.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSmell what, papa?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat dang glue-works.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She did the same thing her mother had done: laughed, and said, ‚ÄúNo! How foolish! Why, papa, it‚Äôs over two miles from here!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou don‚Äôt get it at all?‚Äù he insisted.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThe idea! The air is lovely tonight, papa.‚Äù</p>
			<p>The air did not seem lovely to him, for he was positive that he detected the taint. He wondered how far it carried, and if <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> Lamb would smell it, too, out on his own lawn a mile to the north; and if he did, would he guess what it was? Then Adams laughed at himself for such nonsense; but could not rid his nostrils of their disgust. To him the whole town seemed to smell of his glue-works.</p>
			<p>Nevertheless, the glue was making, and his sheds were busy. ‚ÄúGuess we‚Äôre stirrin‚Äô up this ole neighbourhood with more than the smell,‚Äù his foreman remarked one morning.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow‚Äôs that?‚Äù Adams inquired.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat great big, enormous ole dead butterine factory across the street from our lot,‚Äù the man said. ‚ÄúNothin‚Äô like settin‚Äô an example to bring real estate to life. That place is full o‚Äô carpenters startin‚Äô in to make a regular buildin‚Äô of it again. Guess you ought to have the credit of it, because you was the first man in ten years to see any possibilities in this neighbourhood.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Adams was pleased, and, going out to see for himself, heard a great hammering and sawing from within the building; while carpenters were just emerging gingerly upon the dangerous roof. He walked out over the dried mud of his deep lot, crossed the street, and spoke genially to a workman who was removing the broken glass of a window on the ground floor.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHere! What‚Äôs all this howdy-do over here?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúGoin‚Äô to fix her all up, I guess,‚Äù the workman said. ‚ÄúBig job it is, too.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSh‚Äô think it would be.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYes, sir; a pretty big job‚ÅÝ‚Äîa pretty big job. Got men at it on all four floors and on the roof. They‚Äôre doin‚Äô it <em>right</em>.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWho‚Äôs doing it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLord! I d‚Äô know. Some o‚Äô these here big manufacturing corporations, I guess.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs it going to be?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey tell <em>me</em>,‚Äù the workman answered‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúthey tell <em>me</em> she‚Äôs goin‚Äô to be a butterine factory again. Anyways, I hope she won‚Äôt be anything to smell like that glue-works you got over there not while I‚Äôm workin‚Äô around her, anyways!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat smell‚Äôs all right,‚Äù Adams said. ‚ÄúYou soon get used to it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou do?‚Äù The man appeared incredulous. ‚ÄúListen! I was over in France: it‚Äôs a good thing them Dutchmen never thought of it; we‚Äôd of had to quit!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Adams laughed, and went back to his sheds. ‚ÄúI guess my foreman was right,‚Äù he told his wife, that evening, with a little satisfaction. ‚ÄúAs soon as one man shows enterprise enough to found an industry in a broken-down neighbourhood, somebody else is sure to follow. I kind of like the look of it: it‚Äôll help make our place seem sort of more busy and prosperous when it comes to getting a loan from the bank‚ÅÝ‚Äîand I got to get one mighty soon, too. I did think some that if things go as well as there‚Äôs every reason to think they <em>ought</em> to, I might want to spread out and maybe get hold of that old factory myself; but I hardly expected to be able to handle a proposition of that size before two or three years from now, and anyhow there‚Äôs room enough on the lot I got, if we need more buildings someday. Things are going about as fine as I could ask: I hired some girls today to do the bottling‚ÅÝ‚Äîcoloured girls along about sixteen to twenty years old. Afterwhile, I expect to get a machine to put the stuff in the little bottles, when we begin to get good returns; but half a dozen of these coloured girls can do it all right now, by hand. We‚Äôre getting to have really quite a little plant over there: yes, sir, quite a regular little plant!‚Äù</p>
			<p>He chuckled, and at this cheerful sound, of a kind his wife had almost forgotten he was capable of producing, she ventured to put her hand upon his arm. They had gone outdoors, after dinner, taking two chairs with them, and were sitting through the late twilight together, keeping well away from the front porch, which was not yet occupied, however. Alice was in her room changing her dress.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, honey,‚Äù <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝAdams said, taking confidence not only to put her hand upon his arm, but to revive this disused endearment;‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúit‚Äôs grand to have you so optimistic. Maybe some time you‚Äôll admit I was right, after all. Everything‚Äôs going so well, it seems a pity you didn‚Äôt take this‚ÅÝ‚Äîthis step‚ÅÝ‚Äîlong ago. Don‚Äôt you think maybe so, Virgil?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell‚ÅÝ‚Äîif I was ever going to, I don‚Äôt know but I might as well of. I got to admit the proposition begins to look pretty good: I know the stuff‚Äôll sell, and I can‚Äôt see a thing in the world to stop it. It does look good, and if‚ÅÝ‚Äîif‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù He paused.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIf what?‚Äù she said, suddenly anxious.</p>
			<p>He laughed plaintively, as if confessing a superstition. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs funny‚ÅÝ‚Äîwell, it‚Äôs mighty funny about that smell. I‚Äôve got so used to it at the plant I never seem to notice it at all over there. It‚Äôs only when I get away. Honestly, can‚Äôt you notice‚ÅÝ‚Äî?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúVirgil!‚Äù She lifted her hand to strike his arm chidingly. ‚ÄúDo quit harping on that nonsense!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, of course it don‚Äôt amount to anything,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúA person can stand a good deal of just smell. It don‚Äôt <em>worry</em> me any.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI should think not especially as there isn‚Äôt any.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell,‚Äù he said, ‚ÄúI feel pretty fair over the whole thing‚ÅÝ‚Äîa lot better‚Äôn I ever expected to, anyhow. I don‚Äôt know as there‚Äôs any reason I shouldn‚Äôt tell you so.‚Äù</p>
			<p>She was deeply pleased with this acknowledgment, and her voice had tenderness in it as she responded: ‚ÄúThere, honey! Didn‚Äôt I always say you‚Äôd be glad if you did it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Embarrassed, he coughed loudly, then filled his pipe and lit it. ‚ÄúWell,‚Äù he said, slowly, ‚Äúit‚Äôs a puzzle. Yes, sir, it‚Äôs a puzzle.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat is?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPretty much everything, I guess.‚Äù</p>
			<p>As he spoke, a song came to them from a lighted window over their heads. Then the window darkened abruptly, but the song continued as Alice went down through the house to wait on the little veranda. ‚Äú<i xml:lang="it">Mi chiamo Mimi</i>,‚Äù she sang, and in her voice throbbed something almost startling in its sweetness. Her father and mother listened, not speaking until the song stopped with the click of the wire screen at the front door as Alice came out.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy!‚Äù said her father. ‚ÄúHow sweet she does sing! I don‚Äôt know as I ever heard her voice sound nicer than it did just then.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThere‚Äôs something that makes it sound that way,‚Äù his wife told him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI suppose so,‚Äù he said, sighing. ‚ÄúI suppose so. You think‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShe‚Äôs just terribly in love with him!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI expect that‚Äôs the way it ought to be,‚Äù he said, then drew upon his pipe for reflection, and became murmurous with the symptoms of melancholy laughter. ‚ÄúIt don‚Äôt make things less of a puzzle, though, does it?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIn what way, Virgil?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy, here,‚Äù he said‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äúhere we go through all this muck and moil to help fix things nicer for her at home, and what‚Äôs it all amount to? Seems like she‚Äôs just gone ahead the way she‚Äôd ‚Äôa‚Äô gone anyhow; and now, I suppose, getting ready to up and leave us! Ain‚Äôt that a puzzle to you? It is to me.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, but things haven‚Äôt gone that far yet.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhy, you just said‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>She gave a little cry of protest. ‚ÄúOh, they aren‚Äôt <em>engaged</em> yet. Of course they <em>will</em> be; he‚Äôs just as much interested in her as she is in him, but‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell, what‚Äôs the trouble then?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou <em>are</em> a simple old fellow!‚Äù his wife exclaimed, and then rose from her chair. ‚ÄúThat reminds me,‚Äù she said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat of?‚Äù he asked. ‚ÄúWhat‚Äôs my being simple remind you of?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNothing!‚Äù she laughed. ‚ÄúIt wasn‚Äôt you that reminded me. It was just something that‚Äôs been on my mind. I don‚Äôt believe he‚Äôs actually ever been inside our house!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHasn‚Äôt he?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI actually don‚Äôt believe he ever has,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúOf course we must‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù She paused, debating.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWe must what?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI guess I better talk to Alice about it right now,‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúHe don‚Äôt usually come for about half an hour yet; I guess I‚Äôve got time.‚Äù And with that she walked away, leaving him to his puzzles.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
